.Dd April 16, 2026
.Dt PKG 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg
.Nd personal package manager for macOS user prefixes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar command
.Op Ar args
.Nm
.Cm help
.Op Ar command
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
manages packages in a user-space store/profile layout under
.Pa ~/.local ,
with cache data in
.Pa ~/.cache/pkg
and runtime state in
.Pa ~/.local/state/pkg .
Public commands are exposed through
.Pa ~/.local/bin
and managed GUI applications are exposed in
.Pa ~/Applications .
.Pp
The command set is intentionally small and follows a ports-style workflow:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Cm list
List registry packages.
.It Cm search
Search registry packages.
.It Cm installed
List installed packages.
.It Cm show
Show registry metadata for a package.
.It Cm info
Show installed package state from the manifest.
.It Cm install
Install a package.
.It Cm reinstall
Remove and install the current package version.
.It Cm remove
Remove a package.
.It Cm upgrade
Upgrade one package or all installed packages with
.Cm --all .
.It Cm plan
Show the resolved closure, realization mode, and activation changes for a package.
.It Cm why
Show which active roots require a package.
.It Cm rollback
Switch back to the previous active profile generation.
.It Cm gc
Remove unreachable store objects and stale build state.
.It Cm self-upgrade
Refresh
.Nm
itself from the configured bootstrap source.
.It Cm cleanup
Remove build state, and optionally cached downloads.
.It Cm audit
Report integrity-policy problems in the registry.
.It Cm version
Show installed
.Nm
bootstrap metadata.
.It Cm doctor
Print installation paths and environment diagnostics.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width "~/.local/share/pkg/completions/zsh/_pkg"
.It Pa ~/.local/bin
User-visible command symlinks and wrappers.
.It Pa ~/.local/opt
Legacy package payloads imported from the pre-store layout.
.It Pa ~/.local/state/pkg/store
Immutable store objects and profile generations.
.It Pa ~/.cache/pkg
Downloads and build work directories.
.It Pa ~/.local/share/pkg
Runtime files and managed completions.
.It Pa ~/.config/pkg
Bootstrap and release configuration.
.It Pa ~/.local/share/pkg/completions/zsh/_pkg
Installed zsh completion for
.Nm .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg install bun
pkg show python
pkg info google-chrome
pkg plan hello-local
pkg why codex
pkg upgrade --all
pkg rollback
pkg gc
pkg self-upgrade
pkg cleanup --cache
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width "PKG_BOOTSTRAP_REPO"
.It Ev PKG_RELEASE_REPO
Default GitHub release repository used by
.Cm :github-release
packages.
.It Ev PKG_BOOTSTRAP_REPO
Bootstrap repository used by
.Cm self-upgrade .
.It Ev PKG_BOOTSTRAP_REF
Bootstrap ref used by
.Cm self-upgrade .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr janet 1
.Sh AUTHORS
.Nm
is maintained by Mayphus.
